[Music]
this Asen helps relieve all kinds of
tensions and gives rest to both the body
and the
mind it is very beneficial in the
management of stress and its
consequences
[Music]
kapalabhati it and stimulates
respiratory centers in the frontal
brain sit in any Med ative posture close
the eyes and relax the whole
body inhale deeply expand the chest
expel the breath with forceful
contractions of the abdominal muscles
continue active exhalation and passive
inhalation
[Music]
then take a deep
breath exhale
slowly and
relax this is one round of
kapalabhati each round should be
followed by deep
breathing now do two more rounds
[Music]
kapalabhati purifies the frontal air
sinuses helps to overcome cough
disorders
it is useful in treating colds rhinitis
sinusitis asthma and bronchial
[Music]
infections please avoid this practice in
case of cardiac conditions high blood
pressure vertigo migraine stroke hernia
and gastric
ulcers
pranayama nard Shana or anulom vom
pranayam is alternate breathing through
the left and right
nostrils sit in a meditative
posture keep the spine straight and the
head erect with eyes closed relax the
body with a few deep
[Music]
breaths keep the left palm on the left
knee in Gan
mudra the right hand should be in the
nasika
mudra place the right thumb on the right
nostril breathe in from the left
nostril close the left
nostril exhale through the right
nostril next inhale through the right
nostril close the right nostril
and exhale through it left
[Music]
nostril this is one round of Nardi Shana
or anulom vom pranayam repeat for
another five
[Music]
rounds for beginners the duration of
inhalation and exhalation should be
equal gradually make it 1 is to two
inhalation
exhalation the breath should be slow
steady and controlled the main purpose
of this pranayama is to purify the
principal channels of
energy this nourishes the whole body it
induces
Tranquility helps to improve
concentration it increases
vitality and lowers the level of Stress
and
Anxiety it also elevates cough disorders
[Music]
prar
pranayam brara means a black bee during
the exhalation of this pranayam the
sound produced resembles the buzzing of
a black
bee inhale deeply through both
nostrils exhale
slowly in a controlled manner making a
deep steady humming sound as that of a
black
[Music]
bee this is one round of prar repeat two
more
[Music]
times this is is a great
tranquilizer it's found good in the
management of stress Related
[Music]
Disorders now do the bramar with
shanmuki
mudra close your ears with your thumbs
place the four fingers on your eyes
middle fingers on the nostrils ring
finger and small fingers on the
lips open your nose and inhale through
both
nostrils exhale slowly in a controlled
manner making the Deep humming sound of
a black
[Music]
bee m
it is a useful reparatory pranayam for
concentration and
[Music]
meditation
Dan now let us prepare for
danan danan or meditation is an act of
of continuous
[Music]
contemplation sit in any meditative
posture keep your spine comfortably
erect hold ganam mudra keep your palms
facing upwards upon the
thighs arms and shoulders should be
loose and
relaxed close your eyes and sit with a
slightly up turned
[Music]
face you need not
concentrate just maintain a mild Focus
between the eyebrows and be conscious of
your
breath danan keeps the Mind calm and
quiet it increases concentration memory
Clarity of thought and
willpower it rejuvenates the whole body
and mind giving the proper
rest it helps to develop positive
emotions meditation leads to
self-realization continue to be in this
state of danan
[Music]
oh
let let us now take some
Culp I commit to make myself into a
healthy peaceful joyful and loving human
being through every action of mine I
will strive to create a peaceful and
loving atmosphere around me I strive to
break the limitations of who I am right
now and include the entire world as my
own I recognize the kinship of my own
life with every other life I recognize
the unity of all there
[Music]
is end the yoga practice session with
Shanti part or Universal prayer
[Music]
oh
s
[Music]
NAD pant
Shanty
Shanty shant
[Music]
t e